The second type of user segmentation we're going to
cover is segmenting users by shared demographics.
Segmenting users based on demographics means analyzing
data for groups of users that share the same personal characteristics.
Some example demographics would be age,
income, location, and gender.
Product managers use demographic segmentation to understand if
the personal characteristics of their users result in different product experiences.
Customers with demographics might have
different needs that impact the way they use a product.
For example, men using an app that tracks
user weight might be more interested in a feature that tracks weight gain,
such as muscle gain,
then female users who tend to only want to track weight loss.
Another example would be if lower-income buyers of a product needed
more reassurance of a guaranteed return policy
than higher income users before purchasing.
Of course, these are only hypotheses about
how different demographic segments might interact with the product or feature.
Only by reviewing segmented data can product managers
understand whether there is a difference between demographic segments?
When significant differences emerge,
product managers can form a hypothesis for
the cause of these results and then investigate further.
Such investigations often lead to discoveries
about unmet needs of the underperforming segment.
These unmet needs become opportunities to boost KPIs with targeted product changes.
Once a product manager identifies a user characteristic of interest,
they still need to break down those segments into different groups.
Some segments had dividing lines that are commonly used,
such as female, male,
and other for gender.
Other divisions may depend on the actual data and the type of customer being served.
Take for example, segments of age.
Imagine a reading app that wants to compare segments of customers by age.
A typical app serving an average adult population might divide its users by decades,
a commonly used division when considering age bands as a user segment.
In another instance, however,
a product manager might divide age into smaller segments.
In a children's learning app, for example,
users might be divided into segments of only a few years,
since young children's learning needs change rapidly,
smaller age segments would make more sense than
the traditional decade divisions used in the book reading app.
These examples serve to show that the way you
divide segments as a product manager might vary.
As a product manager,
you will look at the data of actual users by trying
different divisions and considering the customers you serve,
you will know which segment divisions make sense for your product.
The third and final type of user segmentation that we'll cover in
this section is segmenting users who share similar behaviors.
Segmenting users based on behaviors means analyzing data for groups
of users that use your product behave in similar ways.
Some examples would be whether a customer makes use of a specific feature,
how active the customer is,
such as how many times a day a user logs in on average,
and the device with which customers are accessing the product.
A user who uses a software only from their mobile device will have
a very different experience than a user who exclusively logs in on their desktop.
A user who accesses a program every day,
will have a very different experience and likely a different reaction to
new features than a user who only logs in every couple weeks.
Different behaviors indicate that customers might have different motivations and needs.
Segmenting users based on their behaviors allows us to find patterns
in the data about how our product is succeeding or failing,
specific types of users.
Cohort analysis and behavioral information about users will come
naturally from the instrumentation you'll have put in place to track user actions.
In order to analyze products using demographic information however,
you're going to need data about your users in your database.
This may mean asking users to fill out profiles or answer questions about themselves.
A note of caution when seeking information on users.
First, make it clear to users why providing the information will be valuable to them.
For example, users who share their location
will get location-based alerts when they're near a store.
Customers don't want to just handover information about themselves.
You have a duty to provide value to the user if you think them
sharing that information will be helpful in your work to make a better product.
A classic example of information that
most product managers can't ask their users for is user income.
Though this data could be very helpful in segmenting,
most people consider that question personal and private.
If you managed a product like a retirement planning app,
however, such a question would seem relevant to a user and might be answered.
Otherwise, asking for sensitive data like this is more likely to lose you a user,
than gain you information to segment with.
Finally, when collecting user demographic information,
keep in mind that consumer privacy laws,
such as the General Data Protection Regulation,
GDPR in Europe, and the California Consumer
Privacy Act CCPA for any users from California,
give users many rights with regards to their personal information.
As a product manager,
you'll need to ensure the data you collect is stored and
shared in such a way that your customers can easily forbid its sale,
review all the personal information you've
collected and request all personal information be deleted.